README.md, before:

# ClojureWasm

![Status: Pre-Alpha](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-pre--alpha-orange)
![License: EPL-1.0](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-EPL--1.0-blue)
![Zig 0.15.2](https://img.shields.io/badge/zig-0.15.2-f7a41d)

> **Status: Pre-Alpha / Experimental**
>
> ClojureWasm is under active development. APIs may change, and there are
> behavioral differences from reference Clojure. See [DIFFERENCES.md](DIFFERENCES.md)
> for details.
>
> **Verified on**: macOS (Apple Silicon / aarch64). Linux x86_64 and
> aarch64 builds pass CI but have not been extensively tested.

A Clojure runtime written from scratch in Zig. No JVM, no transpilation —
a native implementation targeting behavioral compatibility with Clojure.

## Highlights

- **Fast startup** — ~4ms to evaluate an expression (ReleaseSafe)
- **Small binary** — ~3MB single executable (ReleaseSafe)
- **Single binary distribution** — `cljw build app.clj -o app`, runs without cljw installed
- **Wasm FFI** — call WebAssembly modules from Clojure (461 opcodes including SIMD)
- **Dual backend** — bytecode VM (default) + TreeWalk interpreter (reference)
- **795 vars** across 15+ namespaces (593/706 clojure.core)

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- [Zig 0.15.2](https://ziglang.org/download/) (or `nix develop` for a pinned environment)

### Build

```bash
zig build                     # Debug build
zig build -Doptimize=ReleaseSafe  # Optimized build
```

### Run

```bash
./zig-out/bin/cljw -e '(println "Hello, world!")'   # Evaluate expression
./zig-out/bin/cljw script.clj                        # Run a file
./zig-out/bin/cljw                                   # Interactive REPL
```

### Build a Standalone Binary

```bash
./zig-out/bin/cljw build app.clj -o myapp
./myapp                         # Runs without cljw
```

### nREPL / CIDER

```bash
./zig-out/bin/cljw --nrepl-server --port=7888 app.clj
```

Connect from Emacs CIDER or any nREPL client. 14 ops supported (eval, complete,
info, stacktrace, eldoc, etc.).

## Features

### Language

- Full Clojure reader (EDN, reader macros, syntax-quote, regex, tagged literals)
- Persistent collections: list, vector, hash-map, hash-set, sorted variants
- Transient collections for efficient batch operations
- Lazy sequences with GC-safe realization
- Protocols, defrecord, deftype, multimethods
- Destructuring (sequential, associative, nested)
- Transducers (map, filter, take, drop, partition, etc.)
- Numeric types: integers, floats, BigInt, BigDecimal, Ratio
- try/catch/throw, loop/recur, letfn, with-open
- Metadata system (with-meta, alter-meta!, vary-meta)
- Regex via built-in engine (re-find, re-matches, re-seq, re-groups)

### Namespaces

| Namespace          | Vars  | Description                        |
|--------------------|-------|------------------------------------|
| clojure.core       | 593   | Core language functions            |
| clojure.string     | 21    | String manipulation                |
| clojure.math       | 45    | Math functions                     |
| clojure.set        | 12    | Set operations                     |
| clojure.walk       | 10    | Tree walking                       |
| clojure.zip        | 28    | Zipper data structure              |
| clojure.test       | 32    | Test framework                     |
| clojure.repl       | 11    | doc, dir, apropos, source, pst     |
| clojure.pprint     | 9     | Pretty printing, print-table       |
| clojure.data       | 3     | Data diff                          |
| clojure.edn        | 1     | EDN reader                         |
| clojure.template   | 2     | Code templates                     |
| clojure.stacktrace | 6     | Stack trace utilities              |
| clojure.java.io    | 7     | File I/O (Zig-native)             |
| clojure.java.shell | 5     | Shell commands (sh)                |
| cljw.http          | 6     | HTTP server/client                 |

### Wasm FFI

Call WebAssembly modules directly from Clojure:

```clojure
(require '[cljw.wasm :as wasm])

(def mod (wasm/load "add.wasm"))
(def add (wasm/fn mod "add" [:i32 :i32] :i32))
(add 1 2)  ;=> 3
```

- 461 opcodes (225 core + 236 SIMD)
- WASI support (file I/O, clock, random, args, environ)
- Multi-module linking with cross-module imports
- v128 SIMD operations

### Server & Networking

```clojure
(require '[cljw.http :as http])

(defn handler [req]
  (case (:uri req)
    "/hello" {:status 200 :body "Hello!"}
    {:status 404 :body "Not Found"}))

(http/run-server handler {:port 8080})
```

- Ring-compatible handler model
- HTTP client: `http/get`, `http/post`, `http/put`, `http/delete`
- nREPL in built binaries (`./myapp --nrepl 7888`)
- SIGINT/SIGTERM graceful shutdown with hooks

### Internals

- **NaN-boxed Value** — 8-byte tagged representation (float pass-through, i48 integer, 40-bit heap pointer)
- **MarkSweep GC** — allocation tracking, free-pool recycling, safe points
- **Bytecode VM** — 50+ opcodes, superinstructions, fused branch ops
- **ARM64 JIT** — hot integer loop detection with native code generation
- **Bootstrap cache** — core.clj pre-compiled at build time (~4ms restore)
- **Zero-config projects** — auto-detect `src/`, `cljw.edn` optional

## Project Structure

```
src/
├── main.zig                    CLI entry point
├── root.zig                    Library root
├── clj/clojure/                Clojure source files
│   ├── core.clj                Core library (~2400 lines)
│   └── string.clj, set.clj... Standard library namespaces
│
├── reader/                     Stage 1: Source → Form
├── analyzer/                   Stage 2: Form → Node
├── compiler/                   Stage 3: Node → Bytecode
├── vm/                         Stage 4a: Bytecode execution (+ JIT)
├── evaluator/                  Stage 4b: TreeWalk interpreter
│
├── runtime/                    Core types, GC, environment
├── builtins/                   Built-in functions (27 modules)
├── regex/                      Regex engine
├── repl/                       nREPL server, line editor
└── wasm/                       WebAssembly runtime (461 opcodes)

bench/                          27 benchmarks, multi-language
test/                           62 Clojure test files (38 upstream ports)
```

## Benchmarks

The benchmark suite is in [`bench/benchmarks/`](bench/benchmarks/) with 27 programs
covering computation, collections, higher-order functions, GC pressure, and Wasm.

Run them yourself:

```bash
# Requires hyperfine
bash bench/run_bench.sh                  # All benchmarks (ReleaseSafe)
bash bench/run_bench.sh --quick          # Quick check (1 run)
bash bench/run_bench.sh --bench=fib_recursive  # Single benchmark
```

## Testing

```bash
zig build test                  # 1,300+ Zig test blocks
bash test/e2e/run_e2e.sh       # End-to-end tests
```

62 Clojure test files including 38 upstream test ports with 729 deftests.
All tests verified on both VM and TreeWalk backends.

## Future Plans

Active development areas for future releases:

- **Concurrency** — future, pmap, agent via Zig thread pool
- **JIT expansion** — float operations, function calls, broader loop patterns
- **Generational GC** — nursery/tenured generations for throughput
- **Dependency management** — deps.edn compatible (git/sha deps)
- **Persistent data structures** — HAMT/RRB-Tree implementations
- **wasm_rt** — compile Clojure to run *inside* WebAssembly

## Acknowledgments

ClojureWasm is built with deep appreciation for [Clojure](https://clojure.org/)
and the work of [Rich Hickey](https://github.com/richhickey). Clojure's design
— immutable data, functional programming, and a pragmatic approach to state —
has been a constant source of inspiration. Programming in Clojure is genuinely
enjoyable, and the community's passion and thoughtfulness make it one of the
most rewarding ecosystems to be part of. May Clojure continue to thrive for
many years to come.

This project also builds on the excellent work of the [Zig](https://ziglang.org/)
community. Zig's emphasis on simplicity and explicit control made it possible
to implement a full language runtime in a single, small binary.

ClojureWasm ports test cases from the Clojure test suite (EPL-1.0) and includes
Clojure standard library code adapted for the Zig runtime. See [NOTICE](NOTICE)
for attribution details.

## Contributing

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for build instructions, code style, and
development workflow.

Issues are welcome. For larger changes, please open an issue first to discuss
the approach.

## Support

ClojureWasm is developed and maintained by a single developer. If you find
this project useful, your support would be greatly appreciated and helps
keep development going.

[![GitHub Sponsors](https://img.shields.io/badge/sponsor-GitHub%20Sponsors-ea4aaa)](https://github.com/sponsors/chaploud)

## License

[Eclipse Public License 1.0](LICENSE) (EPL-1.0)

Copyright (c) 2026 chaploud

Commit message:

Document Wasm FFI performance characteristics and future optimization plans
Add performance notes to README (Wasm FFI section + Future Plans) and
ARCHITECTURE.md explaining the ~10-30x interpreter-vs-wasmtime gap,
predecoded IR architecture, and planned JIT/wasmtime-integration paths.

README.md, after:

# ClojureWasm

![Status: Pre-Alpha](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-pre--alpha-orange)
![License: EPL-1.0](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-EPL--1.0-blue)
![Zig 0.15.2](https://img.shields.io/badge/zig-0.15.2-f7a41d)

> **Status: Pre-Alpha / Experimental**
>
> ClojureWasm is under active development. APIs may change, and there are
> behavioral differences from reference Clojure. See [DIFFERENCES.md](DIFFERENCES.md)
> for details.
>
> **Verified on**: macOS (Apple Silicon / aarch64). Linux x86_64 and
> aarch64 builds pass CI but have not been extensively tested.

A Clojure runtime written from scratch in Zig. No JVM, no transpilation —
a native implementation targeting behavioral compatibility with Clojure.

## Highlights

- **Fast startup** — ~4ms to evaluate an expression (ReleaseSafe)
- **Small binary** — ~3MB single executable (ReleaseSafe)
- **Single binary distribution** — `cljw build app.clj -o app`, runs without cljw installed
- **Wasm FFI** — call WebAssembly modules from Clojure (461 opcodes including SIMD)
- **Dual backend** — bytecode VM (default) + TreeWalk interpreter (reference)
- **795 vars** across 15+ namespaces (593/706 clojure.core)

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- [Zig 0.15.2](https://ziglang.org/download/) (or `nix develop` for a pinned environment)

### Build

```bash
zig build                     # Debug build
zig build -Doptimize=ReleaseSafe  # Optimized build
```

### Run

```bash
./zig-out/bin/cljw -e '(println "Hello, world!")'   # Evaluate expression
./zig-out/bin/cljw script.clj                        # Run a file
./zig-out/bin/cljw                                   # Interactive REPL
```

### Build a Standalone Binary

```bash
./zig-out/bin/cljw build app.clj -o myapp
./myapp                         # Runs without cljw
```

### nREPL / CIDER

```bash
./zig-out/bin/cljw --nrepl-server --port=7888 app.clj
```

Connect from Emacs CIDER or any nREPL client. 14 ops supported (eval, complete,
info, stacktrace, eldoc, etc.).

## Features

### Language

- Full Clojure reader (EDN, reader macros, syntax-quote, regex, tagged literals)
- Persistent collections: list, vector, hash-map, hash-set, sorted variants
- Transient collections for efficient batch operations
- Lazy sequences with GC-safe realization
- Protocols, defrecord, deftype, multimethods
- Destructuring (sequential, associative, nested)
- Transducers (map, filter, take, drop, partition, etc.)
- Numeric types: integers, floats, BigInt, BigDecimal, Ratio
- try/catch/throw, loop/recur, letfn, with-open
- Metadata system (with-meta, alter-meta!, vary-meta)
- Regex via built-in engine (re-find, re-matches, re-seq, re-groups)

### Namespaces

| Namespace          | Vars  | Description                        |
|--------------------|-------|------------------------------------|
| clojure.core       | 593   | Core language functions            |
| clojure.string     | 21    | String manipulation                |
| clojure.math       | 45    | Math functions                     |
| clojure.set        | 12    | Set operations                     |
| clojure.walk       | 10    | Tree walking                       |
| clojure.zip        | 28    | Zipper data structure              |
| clojure.test       | 32    | Test framework                     |
| clojure.repl       | 11    | doc, dir, apropos, source, pst     |
| clojure.pprint     | 9     | Pretty printing, print-table       |
| clojure.data       | 3     | Data diff                          |
| clojure.edn        | 1     | EDN reader                         |
| clojure.template   | 2     | Code templates                     |
| clojure.stacktrace | 6     | Stack trace utilities              |
| clojure.java.io    | 7     | File I/O (Zig-native)             |
| clojure.java.shell | 5     | Shell commands (sh)                |
| cljw.http          | 6     | HTTP server/client                 |

### Wasm FFI

Call WebAssembly modules directly from Clojure:

```clojure
(require '[cljw.wasm :as wasm])

(def mod (wasm/load "add.wasm"))
(def add (wasm/fn mod "add" [:i32 :i32] :i32))
(add 1 2)  ;=> 3
```

- 461 opcodes (225 core + 236 SIMD)
- WASI support (file I/O, clock, random, args, environ)
- Multi-module linking with cross-module imports
- v128 SIMD operations
- Predecoded IR with superinstructions for optimized dispatch

> **Performance note**: The Wasm runtime is a pure interpreter (no JIT).
> It is approximately 10-30x slower than wasmtime for compute-heavy modules,
> though module load time is faster (~4ms vs ~5ms). For applications where
> Wasm execution speed is critical, JIT compilation or wasmtime integration
> are planned as future optimization paths.

### Server & Networking

```clojure
(require '[cljw.http :as http])

(defn handler [req]
  (case (:uri req)
    "/hello" {:status 200 :body "Hello!"}
    {:status 404 :body "Not Found"}))

(http/run-server handler {:port 8080})
```

- Ring-compatible handler model
- HTTP client: `http/get`, `http/post`, `http/put`, `http/delete`
- nREPL in built binaries (`./myapp --nrepl 7888`)
- SIGINT/SIGTERM graceful shutdown with hooks

### Internals

- **NaN-boxed Value** — 8-byte tagged representation (float pass-through, i48 integer, 40-bit heap pointer)
- **MarkSweep GC** — allocation tracking, free-pool recycling, safe points
- **Bytecode VM** — 50+ opcodes, superinstructions, fused branch ops
- **ARM64 JIT** — hot integer loop detection with native code generation
- **Bootstrap cache** — core.clj pre-compiled at build time (~4ms restore)
- **Zero-config projects** — auto-detect `src/`, `cljw.edn` optional

## Project Structure

```
src/
├── main.zig                    CLI entry point
├── root.zig                    Library root
├── clj/clojure/                Clojure source files
│   ├── core.clj                Core library (~2400 lines)
│   └── string.clj, set.clj... Standard library namespaces
│
├── reader/                     Stage 1: Source → Form
├── analyzer/                   Stage 2: Form → Node
├── compiler/                   Stage 3: Node → Bytecode
├── vm/                         Stage 4a: Bytecode execution (+ JIT)
├── evaluator/                  Stage 4b: TreeWalk interpreter
│
├── runtime/                    Core types, GC, environment
├── builtins/                   Built-in functions (27 modules)
├── regex/                      Regex engine
├── repl/                       nREPL server, line editor
└── wasm/                       WebAssembly runtime (461 opcodes)

bench/                          27 benchmarks, multi-language
test/                           62 Clojure test files (38 upstream ports)
```

## Benchmarks

The benchmark suite is in [`bench/benchmarks/`](bench/benchmarks/) with 27 programs
covering computation, collections, higher-order functions, GC pressure, and Wasm.

Run them yourself:

```bash
# Requires hyperfine
bash bench/run_bench.sh                  # All benchmarks (ReleaseSafe)
bash bench/run_bench.sh --quick          # Quick check (1 run)
bash bench/run_bench.sh --bench=fib_recursive  # Single benchmark
```

## Testing

```bash
zig build test                  # 1,300+ Zig test blocks
bash test/e2e/run_e2e.sh       # End-to-end tests
```

62 Clojure test files including 38 upstream test ports with 729 deftests.
All tests verified on both VM and TreeWalk backends.

## Future Plans

Active development areas for future releases:

- **Wasm FFI acceleration** — the built-in Wasm interpreter is ~10-30x slower
  than wasmtime (JIT) for compute-heavy workloads. Planned approaches include
  Wasm JIT compilation and optional wasmtime integration via its C API
- **JIT expansion** — float operations, function calls, broader loop patterns
- **Concurrency** — future, pmap, agent via Zig thread pool
- **Generational GC** — nursery/tenured generations for throughput
- **Dependency management** — deps.edn compatible (git/sha deps)
- **Persistent data structures** — HAMT/RRB-Tree implementations
- **wasm_rt** — compile Clojure to run *inside* WebAssembly

## Acknowledgments

ClojureWasm is built with deep appreciation for [Clojure](https://clojure.org/)
and the work of [Rich Hickey](https://github.com/richhickey). Clojure's design
— immutable data, functional programming, and a pragmatic approach to state —
has been a constant source of inspiration. Programming in Clojure is genuinely
enjoyable, and the community's passion and thoughtfulness make it one of the
most rewarding ecosystems to be part of. May Clojure continue to thrive for
many years to come.

This project also builds on the excellent work of the [Zig](https://ziglang.org/)
community. Zig's emphasis on simplicity and explicit control made it possible
to implement a full language runtime in a single, small binary.

ClojureWasm ports test cases from the Clojure test suite (EPL-1.0) and includes
Clojure standard library code adapted for the Zig runtime. See [NOTICE](NOTICE)
for attribution details.

## Contributing

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for build instructions, code style, and
development workflow.

Issues are welcome. For larger changes, please open an issue first to discuss
the approach.

## Support

ClojureWasm is developed and maintained by a single developer. If you find
this project useful, your support would be greatly appreciated and helps
keep development going.

[![GitHub Sponsors](https://img.shields.io/badge/sponsor-GitHub%20Sponsors-ea4aaa)](https://github.com/sponsors/chaploud)

## License

[Eclipse Public License 1.0](LICENSE) (EPL-1.0)

Copyright (c) 2026 chaploud
